<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Kryx.</title>
    <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <meta name="referrer" content="no-referrer" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css" />
  </head>
  <body>
	  <div class="content">
            <h1>A linux begginers friendly guide.</h1>
            <p>Welcome! So you want to start in Linux but you dont know where to start uh? or maybe you just want to know a little bit more, in both cases, you are welcome!</p>
            <p>Before starting, im Spanish and my english is not the best (mainly because i dont care about writing it right) so you are gonna saw a lot of break english, also, a friendly reddiminer that this guide is meant for BEGGINERS, NOT ADVANCED USERS, so please, dont be like "OOoOh thAs So BasIc", or "YoU aRe GoiNg to make NormIes come To LinUx", <a href="https://youtu.be/ChBxWRvKG8M" >Comeme los huevos.</a></p>
            <h2>0. Complex words.</h2>
            <p>During this guide i will use some words that for a begginer could been strange ones, so here a list with some of them:</p>
            <ul>
              <li>Dual-Boot:</li><p>Ability to have 2 systems installed on your PC at the same time, when you boot up your pc a menu will appear asking you to choose an OS.</p>
              <li>Window Managers:</li><p>When you are using a desktop the thing that makes your windows move and everything is the window manager, in linux you can just install one and forget about the desktop, they are not recommended to new users.</p>
              <li>Package Manager:</li><p>Tool that allow users to install, remove and update software.</p>
            </ul>  
            <h2>1. Choosing your distro.</h2>
            <p>This is where you will start your adventure of pain and agony, there are many "begginer friendly distros" that you may know but im going to try to give you some new ones apart the most famous ones.</p>
            <h3>Linux mint</h3>
            <p><a href="https://linuxmint.com/">Linux Mint</a> has two versions, one based on <a href="https://linuxmint.com/download.php">Ubuntu</a> And the other one based on <a href="https://linuxmint.com/download_lmde.php">Debian</a>For a begginer, the differences doesnt matter, so just pick up whatever one you like the most based in their names.</p>
            <h3>Pop!_OS</h3>
            <p>(im so fucking sorry mutah),<a href="https://pop.system76.com/">Pop!_OS</a> might give you some problems but if you want to learn how to solve basic problems then its good.</p>
            <h3>ArcoLinux</h3>
            <p><a href="https://arcolinuxb.com/">ArcoLinux</a> its an Arch-Based distro aimed for begginers and people who dosent want to spend their time setting up 50 billion things, it has a GUI instaler and you can install a lot of software by default and also whatever desktop and Window manager you want, the creator have a ton of videos on YouTube on how to do a lot of things.</p>
            <p><a href="https://i.ibb.co/kXJdBrF/98e87fc317dd.png">Here is a chart with some other distros based on how hard are they.</a></p>
            <h2>2. Why do you want to use Linux?</h2>
            <p>This question is actually important, depending on for what do you need Linux im going to recommend you installing it in different ways, for example, if you are going to use just for programming or studying then just a virtual machine or dual-boot, but if you want to learn linux to make it your main OS then delete any other OS and install only Linux, this is because you are going to find a lot of problems, you are going to get frustated and then delete the OS and you will learn nothing.</p>
            <h2>3. Basic terminal commands.</h2>
            <h3>Sudo</h3>
            <p>Sudo will be the equivalent of "Admin" in Windows, it allow us to run commands as root, just type "sudo" before some random command and it will execute it with root.</p>
            <h3>Package managers</h3>
            <p>Depending on the distro you choosed it will use a different package manager, for arch based distros is "pacman" and for debian and ubuntu ones is "apt"</p>
            <ul>
              <li>Installing softare:</li><p>sudo apt-install *package , sudo pacman -S *package</p>
              <li>Removing software:</li><p>sudo apt-remove *package , sudo pacman -R *package</p>
              <li>Updating</li><p>sudo apt full-upgrade , sudo pacman -Syu/sudo pacman -Syyu</p>   
              </ul>      
              <h3>man</h3>
              <p>man its actually a very helpfull command for begginers, it will display a verbose manual of a command (man *command*)</p> 
              <h3>ls</h3>
              <p>Lists the content of a directory. (ls /dir)</p>
              <h3>mv</h3>
              <p>move files between directorys (mv /dir/file.txt /newdir/file.txt)</p>
              <h3>cp</h3>
              <p>copy files between directorus, same as mv but write cp instead of mv.</p>  
              <h2>4. Final things</h2>
              <h3>Programs compatibility</h3>
              <p>Some programs might have a Linux version but others dont, this is were programs like Wine comes, Wine is a utility that can emulate Windows programs in Linux creating a fake Windows enviorment.</p>
              <h3>Software alternatives, visit OpenSourceAlternatieTo in my useful_sites page for search free alternatives to software that doesnt work on Linux.</h3>
              <p><a href="https://youtu.be/MXtFT0eQfdE">And thats it</a> a simple guide to Linux, i will try to update this when i find it outdated or the voices tell me to do it</p>    
              <p>jajaj y el huracaan.</p>         
            <br/>
            <div class="center">
              <a href="index.xhtml">&lt; MAIN PAGE &gt;</a>
            </div>
      </div>
  </body>
</html>
